COFFEE FARMING KENYA - ENGLISH REFERENCE
==================================================

Which varieties of coffee are grown in the Kenya?
SL 34 suitable for high altitude area;SL 28 at a spacing of 9ft by 9ft suitable for medium to high altitude area, has good rooting system, high yielder but susceptible to diseases.
K7 suitable for low altitude area, has good rooting system, high yielder but susceptible to diseases.
Ruiru 11 is suited to all coffee growing zones in Kenya at a spacing of 6ft by 6ft. It is a high yielder, has best population per unit, high disease tolerance but with poor rooting system.
Batian is the newest variety in the country, is suited to all coffee growing zones in Kenya, a high yielder, has good population per unit, moderate disease tolerance but with moderate rooting system.
Which is the recommended spacing for coffee?
Different varieties require different spacings.
Ruiru 11 spacing of 6ft by 6ft. It is a high yielder, has best population per unit, high disease tolerance but with poor rooting system.Batian is at a spacing of 7ft by 8ft.
Which is the best coffee variety to plant?
The best variety to plant will depend on the zone as different varieties are suited for different ecological zones.
However Ruiru 11 is a high yielder, has best population per unit, high disease tolerance but with poor rooting system,  it is suited to all coffee growing zones in Kenya .
Other coffee varieties commonly grown are SL-28, SL-34, K7, Ruiru 11 and Batian.
What is SL variety?
SL is a coffee variety suitable for middle altitudes.
It's known as SL since it was selected in former Scott Laboratories- Now Kabete,Kenya.
The strain has a long stem which is suitable for absorbing more nutrients from the soil.
The SL 28 cultivar was selected at the former Scott Laboratories (now the National Agricultural Laboratories, NARL situated at Kabete) on a single tree basis from the Tanganyika Drought Resistant variety selected in Northern Tanzania in 1931.
The prefix SL in the variety name are acronymous for Scott Laboratories where the variety was selected. The name is completed by a serial number (28) for the selection. The variety is suited for medium to high altitude coffee growing zones.
SL 34 was also selected at the former Scott Laboratories from French Mission Coffee.
The cultivar is adapted to high altitude areas with good rainfall.
It is majorly characterized by dark bronze shoot tipped plants with a few green-tipped strains.
What is Ruiru 11 variety?
Ruiru 11 variety was released in 1985. The variety name has the prefix “Ruiru” referring to the location of the Kenyan Coffee Research Station where the variety was developed.
The name is completed by an additional two code numbers, 11.
The first code number denotes the type of variety as a one way cross between two designated parent populations and the second number defines the sequence of release, in this case the first release.
The variety is not only resistant to CBD and CLR but is also compact allowing farmers to intensity production per unit land especially in high potential areas where population is high and coffee is in competition with other crops and farm enterprises required for food security and income.
Ruiru 11 is planted at a density of 2500/3300 trees/ha compared to 1300 trees/ha for the traditional varieties.
This translates into a higher production per unit area of land.
The variety comes into production earlier, hence earlier realization of benefits to the farmers.
The development of Ruiru 11 also took into consideration the importance of quality as a major marketing parameter.
Since the quality of the traditional varieties was already popular among consumers of Kenyan coffee, Ruiru 11 was developed with quality attributes similar to the traditional varieties.
It's also compact. therefore, more stems can be accommodated per unit area.
Which type of coffee grows well in high altitude zones?
Arabica coffee does well in high altitude areas. SL 34 – high coffee zone with good rainfall.
Ruiru 11 can also be grown in all coffee growing areas
What is the difference between Ruiru 11 and Batian?
Ruiru 11 is suited to all coffee growing zones in Kenya at a spacing of 6ft by 6ft.
Batian is the newest variety in Kenya and it is suited to all coffee growing zones in Kenya at a spacing of 7ft by 8ft.
Where to buy coffee seeds and seedlings?
Certified seed is only available from CRI-Ruiru centre.
Select seedlings that are about 30 - 40 cm tall, with 1 - 2 pairs of primary branches and that should have undergone sufficient hardening
Where is Robusta coffee grown in Kenya?
Robusta coffee is currently grown in 5 counties (Kisumu, Homabay, Siaya, Bungoma and Busia) with a potential of expansion to Kilifi and Kwale counties in the coastal region.
Why is coffee grown at high altitudes better?
The altitude is closely related to the latitude of the region which affects the temperature, and this directly affects the quality of the coffee bean.
When grown in lower temperatures, the beans take longer to develop, resulting in more complex and delicious flavors. This creates denser beans that roast more evenly and produces a better cup of coffee.
How long does Ruiru 11 coffee take to mature?
Compared with other varieties, which are more slow-growing, Ruiru 11 generally produces its first harvest within two years of planting.
How many kgs can one coffee tree produce?
The yield per tree depends on the variety, ecological factors, agronomic practices among others.
Generally, Coffee trees produce an average of 2.5kg of berries per year, yielding around 0.5kg of green coffee or the equivalent of 0.4kg of roasted coffee, which corresponds to about 40 cups of beverage
How much is Ruiru 11 coffee seedlings in Kenya?
Grafted ruiru 11 seedlings available at ksh 60 per. stem
Where does coffee grow best?
The optimal coffee-growing conditions include cool to warm tropical climates, rich soils.
How to make a nursery bed for coffee?
Prepare 4ft (wide) x 10ft (long) beds. Mix 1 (composted bio-slurry) : 10 (black loam soil). Plant the coffee beans at shallow depth. Water the beds, then mulch
How do I raise coffee nursery?
Preparing the nursery plot. Choose a bigger, flat and fertile plot next to the seed plot.
Make beds of soil 1.2 metres wide, with 60-centimetre paths in between.
How to take care of coffee seedlings in a nursery?
Use planting materials from known sources to ascertain genetic purity. Source seed ONLY from the coffee research institute .
The Potting mixture should be free from either biological or chemical contaminants.
Establish nurseries in pollution free  environments.
Put a shade at 1.2 m (4 ft) above the poly bed • Provide dense shade initially •
Harden seedlings by gradually reducing the shade.
Reduce shade by half when seedlings are • 8 –9 months old
Remove shade completely one month before transplanting.
Use ONLY recommended pesticides to control pests and diseases.
When coffee seedling moved to the nursery?
Six weeks after sowing, the little plant comes up from the soil.
When the seedlings are three months old, the first two leaves are well developed.
This is the moment to take the seedlings out of the seed beds and to transplant them into a nursery.
In removing the seedlings from the seed beds, be very careful not to break the roots
How long does the coffee seedlings stay in a nursery?
4 to 5 months if you want to plant them during the next rainy season, 12 months or more if you want to plant them only next year.
When you remove the coffee tree seedlings from the nursery bed in order to plant them in the plantation, be very careful not to break the roots.
What is the best method for propagating coffee plants?
Select a straight shoot that's about 8 to 10 inches long and remove all but a pair of upper leaves.
Then, plant the cutting in a small pot of soilless potting mix, and keep the soil slightly moist.
When you can gently tug on the plant and feel resistance, you'll know roots have formed.
Can coffee be propagated by cutting?
The cutting should be about 6 inches long with at least two leaves.
Snip off the stem with a diagonal cut.
Step 4: Remove the leaves from the bottom third of the cutting.
Dip the cut end in rooting hormone, then plant the cutting in the hole
How is coffee propagated?
Coffee can be vegetatively propagated either by grafting, stem-cutting or seed
How do you transplant the coffee seedlings to the farm?
Prepare the new planting site by loosening the soil and adding compost or other organic matter to improve the soil structure and fertility.
Choose a location that receives plenty of sunlight and has well-drained soil.
When the seedlings are ready, dig a large enough hole to accommodate the seedling’s root system without crowding it.
Gently loosen the seedlings roots and position it in the hole, ensuring that the top of the root ball is level with the surrounding soil.
Fill in the hole around the roots, and firm the soil gently to remove any air pockets.
What are the conditions for coffee growing?
Most coffee grows at altitudes between 1400 and 2000 metres in deep, well-drained volcanic soils.
Temperatures range from 15 to 24 degrees and average rainfall ranges from 900–1200mm.
What to consider when selecting a site for coffee planting?
The soil must have a good structure so that the roots can penetrate well.This is because coffee trees have  tap roots.
The tap root goes straight down into the soil.
You can improve the soil structure by spreading manure around the base of the coffee trees.
The soil must be deep, so that the roots can go down deep.
Never plant coffee trees in soil which has a hard layer, or, if you do, break up the hard layer
How to prepare land for planting coffee?
Land preparation should be done early about 6 months prior to planting by clearing existing vegetation and getting rid of tree stumps and roots.
If the farm is heavily forested gradually dry existing trees about a year before planting.
Prepare the land well in advance, digging out all tree stumps, roots, bushes and grasses.
Land cleared of trees within 6 months should not be used for coffee planting because of the risk of Armillaria, a fungal disease that causes root rot.
Ensure soil analysis is done to determine the inherent soil condition.
Make terraces or other soil conservation structures where the land has steep slopes.
Protect bench terraces by planting grasses e.g. Blue grass (Paspulum notatum) on the bench faces
What is the best way to grow coffee?
Leave 3 metres between trees. In this way you can plant about 1 000 coffee trees per hectare.
Before planting the coffee seedlings you must dig holes in order to stir the soil and loosen it. Dig the holes two months before planting the coffee trees.
How to plant coffee seedlings?
Before planting, the seeds should be soaked in water for 24 hours to soften the seed coat and encourage germination.
What is the recommended spacing of coffee?
Which is the best type of soil to plant coffee?
Coffee can be grown on many different soil types, but the ideal is a fertile, volcanic red earth or a deep, sandy loam.
What is the soil pH for coffee cultivation?
Coffee prefers a soil with pH of 5 to 6.
Is it advisable to bend newly transplanted coffee to produce more branches?
Newly planted should be cut within the first two primaries to allow strong double shooting
What is the recommended spacing SL 34, SL 28, and K7 coffee seedlings varieties?
SL 34, SL 28, and K7 varieties, the spacing should be 2.74m x 2.74m (9ft × 9ft).
How many coffee trees can be planted in an īka?
1380-2000 trees per īka depending on the arabica variety; in the case of Robusta, plant between 253-675 trees per īka
How many Ruiru coffee trees per īka?
Ruiru II requires a spacing of 2×2 meters (6.6 by 6.6 feet).
With this spacing, it will translate to 2,500 Ruiru II coffee trees per hectare (1,012 coffee plants per īka).
What is the recommended spacing of Ruiru 11 coffee seedlings?
Ruiru 11 variety, the spacing should be 2m x 2m (6.6 ft. x 6.6 ft.)
What is the recommended spacing of Batian coffee seedlings?
Batian variety, the spacing should be 2.1m x 2.5m (7ft x 8 ft.).
When you want to change cycle, what height of stump should you leave?
Cut stems about 25-30 cm from ground at angle of 45 degrees slanting outwards
How to prune coffee in Kenya?
Cut off the top of the tree so that the coffee tree is not taller than 1.5 to 2 metres.
Remove the branches at the bottom of the trunk.
Leave only the thickest and best branches on the trunk.
Cut away all the small branches that grow on the trunk. Cut away all the small branches that grow on the trunk. Cut away all the dead and dry branches, and all diseased branches. Cut away suckers; they are not needed.
When to prune coffee plant?
Coffee plants can be pruned in the early stages of growth by cutting back the growing tip to encourage lateral branching, this will promote more flowers and fruits.
Mature plants can be cut back quite hard every three years to manage size and encourage lateral growth.
Why is it important to prune coffee trees?
Pruning and stumping help to improve the health and yield of your coffee plants.
Coffee cherry production naturally decreases with age, exhaustion, and phytosanitary problems, but this kind of maintenance can help to maintain or boost productivity levels throughout the years.
How to mulch coffee?
It can be done using sisal waste, coffee pruning, and maize or banana trash.
Mulching has several benefits to coffee e.g. conservation of moisture during dry spells, suppression of weed growth, nutrient supply, improvement of soil structure and water infiltration, checking of soil erosion and topsoil temperature as well as reduction of pests’ incidence, e.g. thrips.
When does coffee mature after planting?
Coffee tree reaches maturity after 4 – 7 years, when it begins to bear fruit in clusters along its branches. These fruits are commonly referred to as cherries.
How long does coffee take to grow?
It can take anywhere between three to four years after planting for coffee plants to bear the cherries.
They start by producing white blossoms and around eight months later, coffee cherries will usually appear.
The cherries contain the coffee seeds or more commonly recognised as the coffee beans.
Which is the recommended way to weed a coffee farm?
Do hand weeding around the young trees.
Use implements like the half-moon jembe to weed in between the rows.
In the event that there are stubborn weeds like couch grass, cover the seedlings (with a bucket or bag) before spraying the weeds with a suitable herbicide.
Which crops can you intercrop with coffee?
Suitable intercrops include short leguminous crops such as beans, tomatoes and Irish potatoes.
Plant the intercrops using a recommended fertilizer preferably NPK fertilizer such as 17:17:17.
Plant the intercrop at the middle of the inter rows at least 2 feet away from the coffee rows/stem.
What to intercrop coffee with?
The technically and economically viable intercrops for coffee were potatoes, tomatoes, beans, and tomatoes in combination with beans.
How to maintain a coffee plantation?
replace seedlings that have not grown, keep the soil covered and remove weeds, prune the coffee trees correctly, apply fertilizers, protect the coffee trees from insects and diseases.
How to increase coffee berry weight?
Nitrogen 
Nitrogen is needed for good growth, but too much at later stages of crop maturity can compromise coffee berry size.
Potassium 
High supplies of potassium are needed during berry set and berry fill to maximize sugar accumulation in berry and eventual bean.
Potassium has a crucial role to play in improving coffee berry size and quality through its role in the movement of sugars from the leaf for accumulation in the fruit.
It is mobile in the tree and during peak periods of growth – particularly fruit fill – reserves in the leaves can soon become depleted, leading to dieback.
Boron 
Foliar boron has a significant positive effect on coffee berry size – improving the quality grade of coffee beans.
However, foliar sprays can provide a good, in-season top-up response, raising leaf levels such that coffee production and bean quality are maintained.
What are the methods of cultivation of coffee?
Coffee seeds are generally planted in large beds in shaded nurseries.
The seedlings will be watered frequently and shaded from bright sunlight until they are hearty enough to be permanently planted.
When does intercropping starts?
Intercropping can be undertaken within the first two years after establishment.
When to apply fertilizers to coffee?
Apply 50g of CAN per seedling six months after planting.
After one year, apply 80g of NPK e.g. 17:17:17 per tree.
One and half year apply 100g of CAN. At two years, apply NPK at 125g per tree.
Subsequent applications should be as per the recommendations. For the first two years, abort the flowers to encourage vegetative growth.
Best foliar fertilizer for coffee in Kenya and when to spray?
Boron – promotes shoot growth and facilitates optimal flowering/fruit set.
Zinc – promotes flower bud formation and development. It also increases the coffee plant resistance to cold.
Calcium – enhances formation and growth of terminal buds/flower.
Some of the best foliar fertilizers for increased flowering and bud formation include: Omex Zibo (Omex Foliar Boron) by Omex Oshbor by Osho Chemicals, Agrigrow (Zinc + Boron) by Agrichem Africa
When to fertilize coffee plant?
Coffee Plants can grow several feet tall at their fullest height, so regular fertilizing and repotting can help your Coffee Plant manage healthy growth!
Fertilize with a balanced houseplant fertilizer every 2-3 months in warmer seasons. Don't fertilize in the fall and winter while the plant is resting
What is the fertilizer management for coffee?
Currently, the fertilizer recommended rate (RR) for coffee is 180 Nitrogen (N)- 90 Phosphorus (P)- 180 Potassium (K).
In areas following the multiple cropping system such as Cavite and other provinces, it is recommended to apply 200-100-200 per hectare plus the needed micronutrients depending on soil analysis
What is the best fertilizer for coffee flowering?
Magnesium and sulfur have a positive effect on coffee yield and supplies should not be limiting throughout the season.
Zinc and Boron are particularly important at the flowering stage to improve berry set and overall coffee yield potential.
What is the best fertilizer for coffee trees?
Coffee trees need a lot of potash, a lot of nitrogen, and a little phosphoric acid.
Spread the fertilizer in a ring around each coffee tree, but be very careful not to put any on its trunk, branches or leaves.
Is urea fertilizer good for coffee?
Nitrogen is the nutrient most extracted by the coffee plant and the nutrient of second greatest export by coffee beans
Is DAP fertilizer good for coffee?
This includes both macro and micronutrients which is achieved through application of both basal and foliar fertilizers
For an optimal production, the crop should be provided with a proper nutrition.
When should you not use urea fertilizer?
Urea should be applied at the time of sowing.
Since Urea is highly Nitrogen-concentrated, it should be used in combination with earth or sand before its application.
Urea should not be applied when the soil contains free water or likely to remain wet for three or four days after application.
What is the best climate for coffee farming in Kenya?
Most coffee grows at altitudes between 1400 and 2000 metres in deep, well-drained volcanic soils.
Temperatures range from 15 to 24 degrees and average rainfall ranges from 900–1200mm.
What are the stages of coffee fruiting?
STAGE 1.
1-7 weeks (0 -50 days) after blooming. Slow Growth stage; the fruit is as big as the tip of a match.
STAGE 2.
8-17 weeks (50-120 days) after blooming. The fruit grows quickly; the seed has a gelatinous consistency.
STAGE 3
18–25 weeks (120–180 days) after blooming. The seed completes its development, acquires a solid consistency and gains weight.
STAGE 4
26–32 weeks (180–224 days) after blooming. Fruit is physiologically developed and begins to mature.
After week 32 (more than 224 days), fruit over-ripens and turns dark purple. Finally, it dries.
How to increase coffee yield and Quality?
The highest coffee yields are obtained on freely drained soils where water is not limiting.
Thorough soil preparation prior to planting, and maintenance of pH between 5.2- 6.3, good rooting and that nutrients are readily available.
It is therefore important to balance the cations in the soil at this stage.
Fertilizer application is essential if high coffee yield potential crops are to be secured.
Nitrogen is essential for strong vegetative growth and to maintain good strong cherry fill for high yields.
Potassium promotes vigor, boosts cell strength and increases the coffee tree`s tolerance to diseases, and water or frost stress.
Potassium is a key driver for coffee yield, important for respiration, photosynthesis and water regulation.
It is also important to balance potassium use to nitrogen-use, as high levels of both nutrients are needed for optimum growth.
Phosphorus is important for early growth and rooting, particularly in the nursery and at transplanting, as well as bean fill.
Especially during peak periods of demand, phosphorus foliar applications can increase coffee yields.
Calcium is needed to ensure good root and leaf growth, strengthening the coffee tree structure and increasing tree productivity. It is required right through berry-fill.
Magnesium and sulfur have a positive effect on coffee yield and supplies should not be limiting throughout the season.
Zinc and Boron are particularly important at the flowering stage to improve berry set and overall coffee yield potential.
Poor availability of any micronutrient will restrict coffee plant growth – particularly productive leaf area – and reduce coffee yield.
Other Crop Management Practices Influencing Coffee Yield The return of composed pulp or trash will serve as a mulch to conserve moisture as well as providing a source of nutrients.
Maintenance of strong roots and strong growth through good pest and disease control, the use of shelters, and use of recommended crop husbandry practices, ensures maximum coffee productivity and fruit fill.
Regular pruning is essential to thicken the tree structure and produce new branch growth with a greater number of berries.
At the same time, an open canopy between trees is essential to ensure even ripening.
Do coffee berries mature at once?
Coffee berries do not generally mature all at once and berries in several stages of development are found on any given tree.
What is the water requirement of coffee?
The irrigation requirement of coffee is very high; around 101 m3 water per īka per season.
Which irrigation method is used for coffee?
Drip irrigation increases coffee yields, while also improving crop quality.
In addition, drip technology leads to significant savings in water, fertilizer and labor.
Should I water my coffee seedlings?
During dry spells, water the seedlings at least two times a week until they are well established.
Avoid over-watering to encourage proper root development.
What to do when the land is slope?
Undertake terracing and plant stabilizing grass on the face of the terraces
How do you manage berry moth?
Biological Solution is using Cephalonomia stephanoderis, a parasitoid wasp species that lays its eggs on the borer larvae, which helps to control the population of the pest.
Another option is using sprays of Beauveria bassiana, an entomopathogenic fungus that naturally infects and kills the coffee berry borer.
What are the common coffee diseases?
Coffee rust: This is a fungal disease that attacks the leaves of the coffee tree, causing yellow or orange spots to form on the surface.
To control the disease, it is important to prune and remove infected leaves and apply a fungicide.
Coffee berry disease: This is a fungal disease that affects the fruit of the coffee tree, causing the berries to turn red and black. To control it, prune and remove infected berries and apply a fungicide.
Root rot: This is a fungal disease that attacks the roots of the coffee tree, causing them to rot and die.
It can be controlled by ensuring proper drainage and applying a suitable fungicide.
Leaf blight: This is a bacterial disease that affects the leaves of the coffee tree, causing them to turn yellow and brown.
To control this disease, it is important to prune and remove infected leaves and apply a bactericide to the tree.
Coffee mosaic virus: This is a viral disease that affects the tree leaves, causing them to develop a mottled or mosaic-like pattern.
Coffee mosaics can be controlled by removing and destroying infected plants.
What are common pests that affect coffee ?
Coffee berry borer: This is a small beetle that burrows into the fruit of the coffee tree, causing significant damage to the berries.
The beetle can also transmit diseases, which can further harm the trees.
Coffee leaf miner: This is a tiny insect that feeds on the leaves of the coffee tree, causing yellow or brown spots to form on the surface.
The leaf miner can also transmit diseases, further harming the trees.
Coffee mealybug: This is a tiny, sap-sucking insect that feeds on the leaves and stems of the coffee tree.
The mealybug can cause the tree to become weakened and less productive.
Coffee thrips: This tiny, slender insect feeds on the coffee tree’s leaves and flowers.
The thrips can cause the leaves to become distorted and discoloured, reducing the tree’s ability to produce fruit.
Coffee mite: This is a tiny, spider-like insect that feeds on the leaves of the coffee tree.
The mite can cause the leaves to become yellow and deformed, reducing the tree’s ability to photosynthesize.
How to control coffee berry borer?
Use of insecticides recommended insecticides against coffee berry borers;
LEXUS 247SC 8ml/20l
PROFILE 440EC 30ml/20l
RANGER 480EC 30ml/20l
KINGCODE ELITE 50EC 10ml/20l
SINOPHATE 750SP 20g/20l
PRESENTO 200SP 5g/20l
While spraying the insecticides, it is advisable to mix it with INTEGRA 3ml/20l, which improves the efficacy of the chemical.
Several insecticides should be alternated in a crop’s season in order to prevent the pest from gaining resistance over either of the chemicals.
Practising rotations and intercropping to reduce pest population, Maintenance of field sanitation, Proper weed control
Destroying the attacked berries by burying them deep in soil or by burning.
Setting baited traps in the pruned fields
Use of natural enemies of the coffee berry borer to reduce the population.
How to prevent green scales on coffee?
Prune and remove old branches and leaves so as to enhance aeration
Avoid planting host plants such as avocados, guavas, pineapples, citrus, etc.as wind breaks
Improve shade by sparsely planting shade crops such as Graveillia spp., Leucena spp., or Macadamia spp. to encourage natural enemies.
How to control green scales on coffee?
Apply with a brush at the base of the stem (1 foot from the base) a 15 cm wide band of a deltamethrin based product such as Decis 2.5 EC, Atom 2.5EC etc at the rate of 10-
15mls/20L of water mixed with 15 gms of Methylene blue which acts as a marker
Mode of action: pyrethroid with contact and residual activity.
Spray with mineral oils at 200 mls per 20 litres of water Spray with soapy solution (potassium soaps).
Introduce natural enemies such as. Cryptolaemus montrouzieri, Verticillium lecanii to reduce population of scales in the ecosystem.
How to control Coffee Berry Disease on coffee?
Plant resistant varieties e.g. Ruiru 11 or Batian
Prune properly after harvest to maintain open penetration and improve aeration
Remove old stems and thin out branches as the old stems are more susceptible than young ones
Change the crop cycle after every 7 years
Do a pre-rain preventive spray before the short and long rain seasons.
Pluck off diseased berries, collect in a container and destroy by burning or burying
Cut back the affected plants and graft gradually using resistant varieties like Ruiru 11 or Batian
How to control Bacterial Blight of coffee?
Cultural control - proper pruning, minimising use of high N foliar feed formulations, splitting ground N application, sterilizing pruning tools (e.g. with Kerol 1% or Lysol 3% or methylated spirit),
cutting off and burning infected twigs and branches, frequent de-suckering and avoiding transportation of seedlings from Bacterial Blight prone areas.
• Chemical control - use of bactericides (Copper based products are most effective).
• During the wet weather, use Kasumin Bordeaux (Copper Sulphate plus Lime at 1:1 ratio).
• A single spray after hailstorm to protect fresh wounds from infections is necessary.
How to control bacterial blight of coffee?
Use of copper sprays especially during wet season.
Spray at 2 week interval during the rains and 3 week interval after the rains.
Plant shade trees and wind breaks on exposed sides of BBC areas. Avoid planting material from known BBC areas
How to control coffee wilt?
The disease is caused by a fungus living in the soil and dead infected plant materials.
The fungus enters the plant through wounds on the stem and roots. The fungus grows inside the plant and blocks the movement of water up the plant.
Without water, the leaves wilt.
Why do coffee berries fall?
Coffee Berry Disease or nutrients deficiency.
How to manage Leaf Rust in coffee?
Cultural control - Proper and timely pruning and regular change of cycle.
Chemical control - This entails the use of recommended Copper- based fungicides.
Timing is critical for the control of leaf rust and the sprays should be applied before the commencement and during the early period of the rainy season.
For effective management:Start the 1st round of sprays just before the short rains and repeat 3 weeks later.
Start the 2nd round of sprays before the onset of long rains and do 2 more at 3 weeks interval.
In case the infection is severe (20% of leaves have rust), it is necessary to use a systemic fungicide such as Alto or Bayleton.
Do not spray more than 2 times a year as it affects production of plant hormones leading to hormonal imbalance such as the balance between floral and vegetal inducing hormones.
This may affect flowering and thus production.
Adhere to the spray programme. Improper use of fungicides may lead to development of resistance by the pathogen.
Resistant varieties - Planting of disease resistant varieties
What is the best fungicide for coffee berry disease?
Cabrio 250 EC. Cabrio®  solution can be used to control coffee berry disease with the AgCelence® effect which translates to increased yield and quality.
How to control Fusarium Bark Disease?
Avoid deep planting.Keep soil pH at optimum (4.4-5.4).
Proper application of mulch (6” from the stump) to avoid Collar rot.
Sterilising of pruning tools with methylated spirit.
Eliminate wood boring insect pests e.g. yellow headed borer.
This can be done by maintaining soil potash at optimal level as per soil analysis recommendations.
Uproot and burn all infected trees having die bark from Collar rot.
How to control Mealy bug management in coffee?
If no chemicals are sprayed, the mealybugs are often naturally controlled by parasitic wasps (Anagyrus kivuensis) that eat inside the bug.
Band tree trunks with 20 cm wide plastic bands covered with a sticky substances (e.g. warmed up and then cooled oils) mixed with insecticides (e.g. products containing chlorpyrifos) to prevent ants assessing the bugs.
Be careful when mixing pesticides because they are toxic (WHO toxicity class II moderately hazardous).
Remove suckers and branches that touch the ground to prevent ants.Spray the ground where ant nests are located by using insecticides, but they are toxic to you.
Products containing malathion are slightly hazardous (WHO toxicity class III).
Products containing dimethoate, diazinon, ethion, carbaryl are more toxic (class II, moderately hazardous).
Wear protective clothing. Read and follow product label.
Apply oils (such as vegetable oils, neem oil or mineral oils) or soapy solutions (1 to 2%) to kill mealy bugs by suffocation.
Use soapy water or oils only during non-hot and non-sunny periods to prevent discolouration of leaves. Prior to applying them extensively, apply to a branch and after 48 hours check for adverse reactions of the coffee plant
How to control pest and disease in coffee?
Planting resistant Varieties:  Breeding and cultivating coffee varieties that are naturally resistant to common diseases can significantly reduce the need for chemical treatments.
Research and development efforts should focus on creating disease-resistant coffee cultivars that maintain quality and yield.
Practicing Integrated Pest Management (IPM): Adopting IPM practices involves monitoring, prevention, and intervention strategies to manage pests and diseases.
What are the consequences of harvesting unripe coffee berries?
Picking green coffee cherries can have several harmful effects on both the coffee plants and the overall quality of the coffee produced. Some potential consequences:
Reduced Yield and Quality: Green coffee cherries have not reached full maturity, meaning they haven't developed their full flavor potential.
Picking them prematurely can result in lower-quality coffee with less desirable taste characteristics.
Lower Coffee Bean Weight: Green coffee cherries are heavier than ripe ones.
Picking them before they are fully mature can lead to a lower overall yield as the beans haven't had the chance to reach their maximum weight.
Impact on Plant Health: Picking green cherries may stress the coffee plants.
The energy invested in producing those cherries is lost, and the plant may take longer to recover.
This can impact the overall health of the coffee plants and their ability to produce high-quality beans in subsequent harvests.
Reduced Cupping Score: In the coffee industry, the quality of coffee is often assessed through a process called cupping.
Coffee made from green cherries is likely to receive a lower cupping score compared to coffee made from fully mature cherries, affecting its market value.
Economic Consequences: Picking green coffee cherries can have economic consequences for coffee farmers.
The lower quality and reduced yield can result in lower income for the farmers, impacting their livelihoods and the economic sustainability of coffee production in a region.
Environmental Impact: Picking green cherries may contribute to environmental degradation.
If there is a consistent practice of harvesting immature cherries, it can disrupt the natural balance of the ecosystem, affecting soil health and biodiversity.
Quality Consistency: Coffee flavor profiles can vary widely based on factors like altitude, climate, and soil.
Picking green cherries can introduce inconsistency in flavor, making it challenging for coffee producers to maintain a consistent and high-quality product.
How do you know coffee is ready for harvesting?
The fruit is initially green and turns red when it is ready for harvesting.
When do you harvest coffee berries?
Harvesting time varies by region and altitude.
Only the ripe berries should be harvested because immature and overripe berries yield poor bean quality.
Coffee is harvested by hand by one of two ways, i.e., strip picking or selective picking.
What is the process of coffee after harvesting?
This process involves harvesting, pulping, fermenting, washing, drying, hulling, cleaning, grading, sorting, storing and transporting green beans.
The process can be broadly divided into two main components - Wet Processing (cherry to dry parchment) and Dry Processing (dry parchment to exportable green bean)
How to harvest quality coffee?
How many times is coffee harvested in a year in Kenya?
What is the best way to harvest coffee?
Most coffee beans are harvested by hand, in which they can be strip picked or selectively picked.
The topography of certain regions means machine harvesting is not always possible owing to the steep terrain.
What is the process of coffee after harvesting?
This process involves harvesting, pulping, fermenting, washing, drying, hulling, cleaning, grading, sorting, storing and transporting green beans.
The process can be broadly divided into two main components - Wet Processing (cherry to dry parchment) and Dry Processing (dry parchment to exportable green bean)
How to harvest quality coffee?
The process of harvesting coffee beans is an important part of the coffee production process and has a major impact on the quality of the final product.
Below is an overview of how to harvest high-quality coffee beans:
Choose harvest time: Harvest time affects the maturity of coffee beans.
Choosing the time to harvest must ensure that the seeds have reached optimal maturity.
For some types of coffee, this process lasts from several weeks to several months.
Harvesting method: There are two main methods for harvesting coffee: hand harvesting and machine harvesting.
Hand harvesting is often preferred for high-quality coffees, where the process requires meticulousness and selection.
Harvesters are often used for larger and more cost-effective harvests.
Bean selection: After harvesting, coffee bean selection is the next important step. Coffee beans are often selected to eliminate those that are of poor quality or have defects.
Processing process: After being harvested, coffee beans often need to go through processing steps such as peeling, drying, or cooking to remove the skin and coffee beans and create a high-quality product.
Storage conditions: Coffee beans need to be stored at stable temperature and humidity conditions to ensure that they are not damaged and retain their best flavor.
How do you sort coffee?
Cherry is sorted out before pulping, which helps to remove the immature, diseased, insect damaged and dry berries as well as the leaves, twigs and other foreign matter.
The sorted out berries are then ready for processing.
What are the grades of coffee in Kenya?
Currently, there are 8 Kenyan coffee bean grades: E, PB, AA, AB, C, TT, T, and MH/ML.
Grades are given to coffee beans before roasting to determine their size.
Bean size is important since beans of the same size roast at the same rates.
How should coffee be stored?
Coffee stores should be dry, clean and well ventilated.
Never store or keep chemicals in a coffee store. Keep fully dry coffee beans on wooden tables or floors or even in ventilated bins.They should be stirred or turned every day for 10 days before bagging.
They must be put in sacks as they come from the drying tables. Place bags on wooden battens 15 cm above the ground or concrete floor and away from walls.
Do not store close to corrugated iron sheets.
Store for a minimum of 4 weeks and a maximum of 6 months. After that beans become woody. A relative humidity in the store of 60% at 20deg celcius is suitable.
To preserve your beans' fresh roasted flavor as long as possible, store them in an opaque, air-tight container at room temperature.
Coffee beans can be beautiful, but avoid clear canisters which will allow light to compromise the taste of your coffee. Keep your beans in a dark and cool location.
How to store coffee for a long time?
Use an opaque, airtight container, should do the trick, but if the bag your coffee came in has an airtight closure, such as a zip-top seal, you can use that.
Squeeze any additional air out of the bag before closing the seal. Store coffee bags in a cool, dark, and dry area.
How to dry coffee?
Use drying beds that provide aeration from above and below, with a height of approximately 1 m and a width of approximately 1.2m.
It ensures good aeration which leads to even drying and hence high quality coffee
How to keep records in coffee?
A record of activities should indicate when a task was performed , the time taken and cost
How much profit on coffee farming?
Coffee has an average yield of 1-1.5 tons per īka.
One ton of coffee can be sold at KES 350,000, translating to a potential income of KES 350,000 to KES 525,000 per īka
